JEREMY: In real
life, laziness
is frowned upon and
considered to be a bad thing.
However, in programming
languages laziness is a feature
and may be considered
a good thing.
Haskell is a lazy language.
This means that the
evaluation of expressions
is delayed until their
values are actually needed.
The opposite is
eager evaluation,
which is what most programming
languages implement,
like C, Java, and Python.
For instance, consider
this expression--
f applied to 1 plus 1, given
this function definition
f x equals 0.
In an eager language,
the calculation 1 plus 1
is done when the
function f is invoked.
This is call by value.
Whereas in a lazy
language, like Haskell,
the calculation 1
plus 1 is only done
when the parameter value is
used in the function body, known
as call by need.
So in a lazy language,
if a parameter value
is never needed then the
parameter is never evaluated.
Consider f x y equals y, then
f 1 add 1 2 add 2 has value 4
and the calculation of 1
add 1 is never performed.
Formally, we say
the function f is
strict in its second argument.
Some values do not terminate
when we try to evaluate them.
The simplest
non-terminating value
is called bottom, written
in mathematical notation
as shown here.
Its recursive definition in
Haskell is bot equals bot.
A function is strict
in its argument
if when we supply
bottom as that argument
the function fails to terminate.
F bot 42 terminates
fine since we never
evaluate the first argument.
On the other hand,
f 42 bot loops
forever, or at least
until we press Ctrl-C
in the GHC interactive console.
Infinite data structures.
Laziness is very useful when
dealing with infinite data.
For example, think of the
infinite list of one values.
That's an infinite list where
each element is the integer
one.
We can define this
in GHCi as follows.
Let ones equal 1
cons'd onto ones.
See the recursive nature
of the definition here.
What value is
returned by head ones?
Simply the integer value one.
What value is
returned by tail ones?
An infinite list.
I need to press
Ctrl-C to interrupt
this printing and evaluation
of the expression.
The same is true if I
just try to evaluate
the whole expression ones.
I get another infinite
list of one values.
The take function selects
a finite number of elements
from the front of a
potentially infinite list.
So let's say take
3 ones and I get
that, the finite
list of 3 one values.
The drop function drops elements
from the front of the list
and returns the
rest of the list.
Again, it's infinite
so I'm going
to press Ctrl-C to
interrupt the evaluation.
In summary, if computations
are not needed,
then they won't be evaluated.
And we can compute with
infinite data structures
so long as we don't traverse
the structure infinitely.